[Music]
the next time you see a news report of a
hurricane or a tropical storm
showing high winds battering trees and
houses ask yourself
how did the wind get going so fast
amazingly enough
this is a motion that started more than
5 billion years ago
but to understand why we need to
understand spin
in physics we talk about two types of
motion the first is straight line motion
you push on something and it moves
forward the seconds type
spin involves an object rotating or
turning on its axis in place
an object in straight line motion will
move forever unless
something like the friction of the
ground beneath it causes it to slow down
and stop
the same thing happens when you get
something spinning it will keep on
spinning until something stops it
but the spin can speed up if an ice
skater is gliding across the ice
in straight line motion and she pulls
her arms in she keeps on gliding at the
same speed
but if she is spinning on the ice and
she pulls her arms in
you know what happens next she spins
faster
this is called the conservation of
angular momentum
mathematically angular momentum is a
product of two numbers
one that gives the spin rate and one
that gives the distance of the mass from
the axis
if something is freely spinning as one
number gets bigger
the other gets smaller arms closer spin
faster
arms farther spins slower spin causes
other effects
too if you are riding on a spinning
merry-go-round and you toss a ball to a
friend
it will appear to follow a curving path
it doesn't
actually curve though it really goes in
a straight line
you are the one who is following a
curving path but from your point of view
the ball appears to curve we call this
the coriolis effect
oh and you are riding on a spinning
merry-go-round right now at this very
moment
we call it the earth the earth spins on
its axis once each day
but why does the earth spin now that's a
story that starts billions of years ago
a cloud of dust and gas to form the sun
and the earth and the planets and you
and me
started to collapse as gravity pulled it
all together before it started to
collapse
this cloud had a very gentle spin and as
it collapsed
like that ice skater pulling her arms in
the spin got faster and faster
and everything that formed out of the
cloud the sun and the planets around the
sun
and the moons around the planets all
inherited this spin
and this inherited spin is what gives us
night and day
and this day night cycle is what drives
our weather the earth is warm on the
daytime site
cool on the nighttime side and it's
warmer at the equator than at the poles
the differences in temperature make
differences in air pressure and the
differences in air pressure make air
move
they make the wind blow but because the
earth spins the moving air curves to the
right in the northern hemisphere
because of the coriolis effects if
there's a region of low pressure in the
atmosphere
air is pushed toward it like water going
down a drain
but the air curves to the right as it
goes and this gives it a spin
with the dramatic low pressure in a
storm the air gets pulled in tighter and
tighter
so it gets going faster and faster and
this
is how we get the high winds of a
hurricane so when you see a spinning
storm on a weather report think about
this
the spin ultimately came from the spin
of the earth
and the earth spin as a remnant a fossil
relic of the gentle spin
of the cloud of dust and gas that
collapsed to make the earth some five
billion years ago
you are watching something the spin that
is older than dirt that's older than
rocks
that's older than the earth itself
you